# AI-Based-Student-Monitoring
This repository contains an AI-based student monitoring system that can be used to track the progress and behavior of students in real-time.

# Overview
The system uses machine learning algorithms to analyze Student Attendance and Face-recognition Based Attendance. Based on the analysis, the system provides actionable insights to educators and administrators to help them better understand their students and identify any potential issues.

# Features
1. Real-time monitoring of student attendance
2. Automated analysis of student attendance and generating report
3. AI-powered identification of potential academic or behavioral issues
4. Customizable notifications and alerts for educators and administrators
5. Interactive dashboard for easy data visualization and analysis

# Installation
To install the AI-based student monitoring system, follow these steps
1. Clone the repository to your local machine:<br>
git clone https://github.com/namratanarkhede/AI-Based-Student-Monitoring.git
2. Navigate to the project directory:<br>
cd AI-Based-Student-Monitoring/
3. Create a virtual environment:<br>
python3 -m venv env
4. Activate the virtual environment:<br>
source env/bin/activate
5. Create a TrainingImage folder in a project.
6. Change path where needed:<br>
main.py and app.py
7. Run AI-Based-Student-Monitoring:<br>
  To take attendance by Face-recognition: <br> Run main.py<br>
  To Analysis the attendance:<br> Run app.py
  
# Project Structure
1. The system requires the user to provide their face data by entering their ID and name in a box and clicking on the "Take Images" button. The system will collect 200 images of the user's face and save them in the TrainingImage folder.
2. After collecting face data, the system needs to train a model by clicking on the "Train Image" button. This process can take 5-10 minutes for 10 person data.
3. Once the model is trained, the system can fill attendance by face recognition by clicking on the "Automatic Attendance" button. The system will use the trained model to fill attendance and create a .csv file of attendance according to time and subject.
4. The system allows storing attendance data in a database by installing Wampserver and changing the DB name in main.py.
5. The "Manually Fill Attendance" button in the UI can be used to fill attendance manually without face recognition. This process also creates a .csv file and stores it in a database.
6. The attendance data can be analyzed from the database by running app.py. The user can log in with admin credentials to view student data, subject-wise attendance, and overall attendance data that is automatically generated by providing attendance data CSV files.
7. The user can visualize attendance data to view whose attendance is more and whose attendance is low from overall attendance data.
8. The system has a feature to send email notifications to students and parents using Google email services.

# Usage
To use the system, simply log in to the interactive dashboard using your credentials. From there, you can view data of student, real-time attendance, student attendance performance. You can also customize notifications and alerts to receive updates on any potential issues.








